RM-972 Release Notes 2.24.0 (#622)
percona/pmm-doc: docs/release-notes/2.24.0.md

# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.24.0

<table class="docutils field-list" frame="void" rules="none">
  <colgroup>
    <col class="field-name">
    <col class="field-body">
  </colgroup>
  <tbody valign="top">
    <tr class="field-odd field">
      <th class="field-name">Date:</th>
      <td class="field-body">November 18, 2021</td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="field-even field">
      <th class="field-name">Installation:</th>
      <td class="field-body">
        <a class="reference external" href="https://www.percona.com/software/pmm/quickstart">Installing Percona Monitoring and Management</a></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is a free and open-source platform for managing and monitoring MySQL, MongoDB, and PostgreSQL performance.

## New Features

> - [PMM-8027](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8027): Integrated Alerting: WebHook Notification Channels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8027](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8027): Alerting: New notification channel added: Webhooks
```

Reviewer 2: we need to keep "Integrated Alerting"  until we GAed them and rename them officially

> - [PMM-8301](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8301): Add support data collection for the new dimensions of pg_stat_monitor in QAN

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8301](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8301): Add data collection support for newly added metrics for pg_stat_monitor
```

Reviewer 2: I've  renamed the issue for now to "Add collecting and presenting new dimensions of pg_stat_monitor such as Application Name,Top Query, Plan in Query Analytics" as the old title not adding clarity

> - [PMM-8588](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8588): PostgreSQL Histograms in QAN with pg_stat_monitor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8588](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8588): PostgreSQL Histograms added to QAN when using pg_stat_monitor extension
```

> - [PMM-8632](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8632): Query command Type for PostgreSQL instances with pg_stat_monitor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8632](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8632): New Filter: "Command Type" allows filtering queries based on type (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, n/a) when pg_stat_monitor extension enabled
```

## Improvements

> - [PMM-8803](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8803): User friendly notification if you have incompatible util to service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8803](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8803): Backup: Improved error messages to indicate incompatible versions of software
```

Reviewer 2: Backup Management  - this is what we use for now. Added  it to the Jira  title

> - [PMM-8636](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8636): Alerting: Improve alert message by adding more context to it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8636](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8636): Alerting: Additional context to alerts to better convey issue detected
```

- [PMM-8122](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8122): Alerting: UI does not indicate a port is needed in configuration for SMTP communication channel

> - [PMM-8484](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8484): PostgreSQL 14 support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8484](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8484): Added support for PostgreSQL 14
```

> - [PMM-7297](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-7297): update vertamedia-clickhouse-datasource plugin

Reviewer: why?

Author: good questions. I know only one answer - remove errors and complains from the log. But also probably because of security, old one wasn't supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-7297](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-7297): Updated plugin for Clickhouse data source  from 2.1.0 to 2.3.1. This fixes some bugs and eliminates noise from warnings in logs as well as adding support of new types (DateTime64) and improved ARRAY JOIN parsing 
```

## Bugs Fixed

- [PMM-8975](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8975): Scheduled backups - cron expression incorrectly parsed
- [PMM-8387](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8387): MySQL InnoDB Details dashboard is not in the left menu
- [PMM-8858](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8858): Dashboards: No Host uptime on Homepage for RDS instances 
- [PMM-8611](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8611): Agents state shows DOWN if the respective metric is unknown
- [PMM-8393](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8393): Alert rules not executed after upgrading PMM Server running as Docker container

> - [PMM-8058](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8058): IA: Firing alerts disappear after docker restart 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8058](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8058): Alerting: Firing alerts disappear after docker restart 
```

> - [PMM-8089](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8089): lost mongodb_memory metrics for mapped parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8089](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8089): When `mapped` or `mapped_with_journal` returns no values, then exporter fails to generate any metrics
```

- [PMM-9100](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9100): SHOW BINARY LOGS not parsed properly for MySQL8

> - [PMM-9125](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9125): VM Agent has higher memory usage and CPU usage post upgrading PMM Server to 2.24.0 RC

Reviewer: SKIP?  Looks like defect, not bug

Reviewer 2: yes, I've already fixed this in Jira

> - [PMM-8859](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8859): Increase in Memory for postgres_exporter and vmagent with lot of custom queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8859](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8859): Increase in Memory consumption for postgres_exporter and vmagent when executing more than _____ custom queries
```

Reviewer: @BupycHuk can you fill in the blank?

Reviewer 3: it's more related to amount of metrics and tables in all database. we had real high memory usage with 27 metrics for 1000 tables which generated 27000 metrics. So the more we have tables and metrics for them, the more we had used memory.

> - [PMM-9108](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9108): Installed Grafana Plugins on PMM 2.23.0 are not available after upgrade to 2.24.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9108](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9108): Previously installed Grafana Plugins on PMM 2.23.0 are not available after upgrade to 2.24.0
```

Reviewer: This looks like defect, not bug...Skip?

Reviewer 2: Defect and  dup. removed from RN already

> - [PMM-9046](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9046): Incorrect link to instructions about enabling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9046](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9046): Incorrect link to instructions about installing Image Rendering Plugin
```

> - [PMM-8952](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8952): QAN: No table/indexes found with pg_stat_monitor 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8952](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8952): QAN: No table/indexes tab when using pg_stat_monitor 
```

Reviewer 2: I've renamed the issue to 
"Query Analytics: No table/indexes information for Views when PostgreSQL server monitored with pg_stat_monitor" 
this is what is the problem about. for Views only

- [PMM-8588](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8588): PostgreSQL Histograms added to QAN when using pg_stat_monitor extension
- [PMM-8632](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8632): New Filter: "Command Type" allows filtering queries based on type (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, n/a) when pg_stat_monitor extension enabled

## Improvements

- [PMM-8803](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8803): Backup Management: Improved error messages to indicate incompatible versions of software
- [PMM-8636](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8636): Integrated Alerting: Additional context to alerts to better convey issue detected
- [PMM-8644](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8644): Integrated Alerting: API should allow textual TLS configs for webhooks
- [PMM-8122](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8122): Integrated Alerting: UI does not indicate a port is needed in configuration for SMTP communication channel
- [PMM-8484](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8484): Added support for PostgreSQL 14
- [PMM-7297](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-7297): update vertamedia-clickhouse-datasource plugin

## Bugs Fixed

> - [PMM-8975](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8975): Scheduled backups - cron expression incorrectly parsed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8975](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8975): Backup Management: long presentation of recurrent intervals in Backup scheduling 
```

See the issue, it's just about presenting data.

- [PMM-8541](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8541): Navigating through PMM Settings link at Failed security checks panel takes more than 30 seconds
- [PMM-8387](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8387): MySQL InnoDB Details dashboard is not in the left menu
- [PMM-8858](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8858): Dashboards: No Host uptime on Homepage for RDS instances 
- [PMM-8611](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8611): Agents state shows DOWN if the respective metric is unknown

> - [PMM-8393](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8393): Alert rules not executed after upgrading PMM Server running as Docker container

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8393](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8393): Integrated Alerting: Alert rules not executed after upgrading PMM Server running as Docker container
```

> - [PMM-8058](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8058): Integrated Alerting: Firing alerts disappear after docker restart 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8058](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8058): Integrated Alerting: Firing alerts disappear after PMM server restart 
```

> - [PMM-8089](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8089): When `mapped` or `mapped_with_journal` returns no values, then exporter fails to generate any metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8089](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8089): PMM is not exposing data for memory used by MongoDB when it's mapped with the journal. This was inconsistent behavior compared to older versions of PMM. 
```

> - [PMM-9100](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9100): SHOW BINARY LOGS not parsed properly for MySQL8

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9100](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9100): Dashboards: Binary Log related metrics on MySQL Replication dashboard are not prevented and not collected for MySQL8
```

> - [PMM-8633](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8633): Incorrect use of state_code in monitoring with pg_stat monitor. Unfinished queries are included in statistics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8633](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8633): Unfinished queries are included in Query Analytics for PostgreSQL with pg_stat_monitor usage because of incorrect use of state_code. 
```

> - [PMM-8859](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8859): Increase in Memory consumption for postgres_exporter and vmagent when executing either too many custom queries or some queries against too many tables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8859](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8859): Increased memory consumption on Client-side for PostgreSQL monitoring when executing either too many custom queries or some queries against too many tables
```

    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is a free and open-source platform for managing and monitoring MySQL, MongoDB, and PostgreSQL performance.
## Release Highlights
- **Better PostgreSQL monitoring**
  - Starting from this version of PMM, it will support monitoring of PostgreSQL 14. Both versions - Community and [Percona Distribution for PostgreSQL](https://www.percona.com/software/postgresql-distribution).
  - This version of PMM has also a significant improvement in exposed data and additional features if you monitor PostgreSQL together with the [pg_stat_monitor](https://github.com/percona/pg_stat_monitor) extension (Part of Percona distribution for PostgreSQL). We added such features:
    - The PostgreSQL queries will have complete Query execution plan information. This will help with future optimization of queries and get a clear understanding of query performance 
    - Query execution histograms collection and presentation inside Query Analytics for a much more detailed understanding of query executions. 

>     - Query analytics will show and let the user drill down to Top Query for the particular query if it's subquery and have this parent query. This feature will allow the user to see the dependencies between queries better and understand the impact of subqueries. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Query analytics will both show and let the user drill down to the Top Query of the particular query if it's a subquery and have this parent query. This feature will allow users to see the dependencies between queries better and understand the impact of subqueries. 
```
Still don't like the end of the first sentence...

    - Query Analytics can filter PostgreSQL queries by query commands like SELECT, UPDATE, etc., and by Application Name if it's set for PostgreSQL connection from the application.

- **Integrated Alerting (Technical preview):**

>     - Alerting in PMM now has an additional notification channel type - webhooks. So now, users can integrate Alerting with any tool they use for Incident management.  Read more about new notification channels and how to set up them in our documentation (LINK to DOC) 

Reviewer 2: can we link to the current netlify page?

Author: this one doesn't have those docs. But sure temporary you can link to the:   https://deploy-preview-626--pmm-doc.netlify.app/using/alerting.html#add-a-notification-channel

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Alerting in PMM now has an additional notification channel type - webhooks. So now, users can integrate Alerting with any tool they use for Incident management.  Read more about new notification channels and how to set up them in [our documentation  ](https://deploy-preview-626--pmm-doc.netlify.app/using/alerting.html#add-a-notification-channel)
```

Reviewer 2: needs to be updated for public release

>     - Alerting in PMM now has an additional notification channel type - webhooks. So now, users can integrate Alerting with any tool they use for Incident management.  Read more about new notification channels and how to set up them in [our documentation  ](https://deploy-preview-626--pmm-doc.netlify.app/using/alerting.html#add-a-notification-channel)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Alerting in PMM now has an additional notification channel type - webhooks. So now, users can integrate Alerting with any tool they use for Incident management.  Read more about new notification channels and how to set them up in [our documentation  ](https://deploy-preview-626--pmm-doc.netlify.app/using/alerting.html#add-a-notification-channel)
```

## New Features

- [PMM-8027](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8027): Integrated Alerting: New notification channel added: Webhooks
- [PMM-8301](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8301): Add data collection support and visualization for newly added dimensions in pg_stat_monitor such as Application Name,Top Query, Plan in Query Analytics
- [PMM-8588](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8588): PostgreSQL Histograms added to QAN when using pg_stat_monitor extension
- [PMM-8632](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8632): New Filter: "Command Type" allows filtering queries based on type (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, n/a) when pg_stat_monitor extension enabled

## Improvements

- [PMM-8803](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8803): Backup Management: Improved error messages to indicate incompatible versions of software

> - [PMM-8636](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8636): Integrated Alerting: Additional context to alerts to better convey issue detected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8636](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8636): Alerting: Additional context to alerts to better convey issue detected
```

> - [PMM-8644](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8644): Integrated Alerting: API should allow textual TLS configs for webhooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8644](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8644): Alerting: API should allow textual TLS configs for webhooks
```

- [PMM-8122](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8122): Integrated Alerting: UI does not indicate a port is needed in configuration for SMTP communication channel

> - [PMM-8484](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8484): Added support for PostgreSQL 14

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-8484](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8484): Added support for PostgreSQL 14 and Percona Distribution for PostgreSQL 14
```
